flakes: search up to git or filesystem boundary (#5720)
NixOS/nix: src/nix/nix.md

  These have the form *flakeref*[`#`*attrpath*], where *flakeref* is a
  flake reference and *attrpath* is an optional attribute path. For
  more information on flakes, see [the `nix flake` manual
  page](./nix3-flake.md).  Flake references are most commonly a flake
  identifier in the flake registry (e.g. `nixpkgs`), or a raw path
  (e.g. `/path/to/my-flake` or `.` or `../foo`), or a full URL
  (e.g. `github:nixos/nixpkgs` or `path:.`)

>   When the flake reference is a raw path (a path without any URL
>   scheme), it is interpreted in the following way:
> 
>   - If the supplied path does not contain `flake.nix`, then Nix
>     searches for a directory containing `flake.nix` upwards of the
>     supplied path (until a filesystem boundary or a git repository
>     root). For example, if `/foo/bar/flake.nix` exists, then supplying
>     `/foo/bar/baz/` will find the directory `/foo/bar/`;
>   - If `flake.nix` is in a Git repository, then this is essentially
>     equivalent to `git+file://<directory>` (see [the `nix flake`
>     manual page](./nix3-flake.md)), except that the `dir` parameter is
>     derived automatically. For example, if `/foo/bar` is a Git
>     repository and `/foo/bar/baz` contains `flake.nix`, then the flake
>     reference `/foo/bar/baz` is equivalent to
>     `git+file:///foo/bar?dir=baz`. Note that it will only include
>     files indexed by git. In particular, files which are matched by
>     `.gitignore` will not be available in the flake. If this is
>     undesireable, specify `path:<directory>` explicitly;
>   - If the directory is not inside a Git repository, then it is
>     equivalent to `path:<directory>` (see [the `nix flake` manual
>     page](./nix3-flake.md)), which includes the entire contents of the
>     path.

Reviewer: I find this explanation a bit confused. Here’s another take at it (which might not be better tbh, but gives another data-point):

```suggestion
  When the flake reference is a raw path (a path without any URL
  scheme), it is interpreted as a `path:` or `git+file:` url in the following
  way:
  
  - If the path is within a Git repository, then the url will be of the form
    `git+file://[GIT_REPO_ROOT]?dir=[RELATIVE_FLAKE_DIR_PATH]`
    where `GIT_REPO_ROOT` is the path to the root of the git repository,
    and `RELATIVE_FLAKE_DIR_PATH` is the path (relative to the directory
    root) of the closest parent of the given path that contains a `flake.nix` within
    the git repository.
    If no such directory exists, then Nix will error-out.
    
    Note that the search will only include files indexed by git. In particular, files
    which are matched by `.gitignore` or have never been `git add`-ed will not be
    available in the flake. If this is undesireable, specify `path:<directory>` explicitly;
    
    For example, if `/foo/bar` is a git repository with the following structure:
    ```
   .
   └── baz
       ├── blah
       │   └── file.txt
       └── flake.nix
    ```

  Then `/foo/bar/baz/blah` will resolve to `git+file:///foo/bar?dir=baz`

  - If the supplied path is not a git repository, then the url will have the form
    `path:FLAKE_DIR_PATH` where `FLAKE_DIR_PATH` is the closest parent
    of the supplied path that contains a `flake.nix` file (within the same file-system).
    If no such directory exists, then Nix will error-out.
    
    For example, if `/foo/bar/flake.nix` exists, then `/foo/bar/baz/` will resolve to
   `path:/foo/bar`

```

Author: The new explanation is very nice. Thanks @thufschmitt
